(upbeat music)
(keyboard clicking)
In this video, we'll implement the doubly linked lists.
To start us off, I've created a new project.
I'm going to put the code into
academy.learnProgramming.doublyLinkedLists,
and what I've done is I've copied the classes from the
singly linked list implementations.
So in the main method,
I've created the usual four employee instances.
The employee class is exactly the same
as we've been using in the previous videos.
The employee node is what we implemented
when we did the implementation of a singly linked list,
and the same goes for employee doubly linked list.
I've renamed the class,
but right now it's a singly link list implementation.
So the first thing we're going to do
is add a previous field to our employee node class
because now that we have a doubly linked list,
every node is gonna have two references.
So I'll say, private EmployeeNode previous,
and I'll add sets and gets.
I'll let the I to E do this for me.
I'll right click, say generate.
I want a setter and getter.
It's only gonna offer me previous
because it's smart enough to know
that we already have sets and gets for everything else.
And there we go.
And so now our nodes are going to contain
two references which we can also say two links,
one to the next node, and one to the previous node.
So now we need to update our link list implementation.
We're going to add a field for the tail
because in a doubly linked list,
we have a field that points to the head,
or the first node in the list,
any field that points to the tail,
or the last node in the list.
So we'll say private, employee node,
tail, and just like the head,
this will be initialised to null so we don't need
to create a constructor that does that.
So when it comes to the add to front method,
when we add a node to the front of the list,
it's going to become the first node in the list,
and so its previous field will always point to null,
so we don't have to handle the previous field
because the previous field in the employee node instance
will always be initialised to null,
so there's no need for us to set the previous field in here,
but we're gonna have to change the previous field
of the node that's currently at the head of the list
because the previous field of the current head node
will have to point to the node that we're adding
because whatever's at the head of the list right now
is going to become the second node in the list,
and its previous field is going to point back
to the node that we're adding.
The other thing we have to handle in add to front
is the case of when we're starting with an empty list
because when we're starting with an empty list,
both the head and the tail point to null,
and when we add a node to an empty list when we're done,
both the head and the tail should be pointing to the node.
Now normally we wouldn't have to worry about the tail.
If there's already one or more nodes in the list
and we add a node to the front,
the tail isn't going to change because we're growing
the list from the head not from the tail.
So the only time that we have to worry
about setting the tail is if we're adding a node
into an empty list, if this is the first node we're adding.
So we need to make a couple of changes here.
We have to check whether we're adding a node
to an empty list, and if we are,
we need to set the tail to that new node,
and also if we're not adding into an empty list,
then we need to change the current head's previous field
to the node we're adding.
So before we set the head, we're going to say,
if head equals null,
and we could call our is empty method two,
but I'm gonna say head equals null to make
it clear what we're doing here.
If we're adding this node into an empty list,
then we need to set the tail.
So we'll say tail equals node.
If we're not adding the node into an empty list,
we don't need to worry about the tail.
The tail isn't going to change.
Okay, so if we're adding the node to an empty list,
we set the tail to node.
If the list is not empty, then we need to set
the current head node's previous field to the new node.
So we'll say else, head.setPrevious
to the node that we're adding, and that's it.
That's the only changes we have to make.
Now up here, we're setting the next field of the new node
to whatever head is, and if head is null, that's fine.
If we're adding into an empty list,
we want the next field to be null because the node
we're adding is gonna be the only node in the list,
and so there's nothing coming after it,
and so its next field will be null.
And as I mentioned earlier, we don't have to worry
about setting the previous field of the node we're adding
because that's always going to be null
because it's being added as the first item in the list,
so there's nothing before it.
Okay, so add to front is done.
Let me update our print list,
and what I'm going to do is I'm gonna change
this arrow to sort of like a double arrow
so we know that there are two links,
just to make that a little clearer,
and now let's go to our main method,
and let's add some employees to our doubly linked list.
So we'll say EmployeeDoublyLinkedList, list
equals new EmployeeDoublyLinkedList,
and we'll say list.addToFront.
There's nothing new here.
We did this with the singly linked list.
So we'll add Jane Jones,
John Doe,
Mary Smith, and
Mike Wilson,
and then we'll print our list,
and let's get the size too
just to make sure we're incrementing that size correctly,
so we'll print list.getSize.
All right, let's run.
And we'll see that we have four employees,
and just as before,
because we're always adding to the front,
we have Mike in the front position
followed by Mary, followed by John, followed by Jane.
That double arrow there is a single arrow.
I could add a test here to see when we're looking
at the last node, but I think you understand
that null isn't pointing back.
Jane Jones is just pointing to null.
Okay, let me close this off,
and now let's add a add to end, or add to tail method.
I'll call it add to end.
Now for this method, we have to set
the previous field to point to the node
that's currently at the end of the list.
Remember, we're gonna have a node that's pointed
to by tail, and we wanna insert a node at the end,
so we want tail to point to the new node,
and we want the new node's previous field
to point to whatever the current tail is.
Now, once again, we also have to worry about
whether we're trying to add to the end of an empty list
because if we are, we're gonna want to set the head
to the new node just like in the add to front
if we were inserting into an empty list
we wanted to set the tail to the new node.
So we'll say public void addToEnd,
and again, we want the employee,
and so we'll create a new node as we've done before.
And now we want to test whether we have an empty list or not
so we'll say if, and it doesn't really matter here
if we test head or tail.
Since we're in the add to end method, we'll test tail.
So if tail equals null,
we want to set the head to the new node, and don't worry,
we'll take care of the tail field in a minute.
Otherwise, we wanna set the current tail's next field
to the node we're adding, and we wanna set
the previous field of the node we're adding
to what used to be the tail.
So if we have let's say just Jane in the list,
and we're adding John, and we're adding John to the end,
we're gonna want Jane, the current tail,
we're gonna want her next field
to point to John who is the new node,
and we're gonna want John's previous field
to point to Jane, and she's currently the tail
'cause we haven't changed the tail yet,
and that's what we're gonna do now.
So our final step is to set the tail to node,
and of course we need to increment the size.
And so this adds an employee to the end.
So let's go back to the main method,
and let's add Bill to the end of our list.
Let me create the employee instance separately
so I'll say Employee billEnd to show that we want him
at the end, equals new Employee Bill, End,
and we'll give him an ID of 78,
and then we'll say list.addToEnd, billEnd,
and I'll call copy these two lines.
We'll print our list, and we'll print the size
just to make that we're incrementing the size correctly.
All right, let's run.
And now we'll see we have five employees,
and this time, Bill is not at the front of the list
because that's not where we've added him.
So we've got Mike, Mary.
So far, our list is the same.
John Doe,
Jane Jones, and finally we have Bill end at the very end,
so he's where he's supposed to be.
I'll just close this down,
and let's go back to our link list class.
Now just as in the add to front method,
we didn't have to worry about setting the new nodes
previous field 'cause it would be initialised to null.
In the add to end method, we don't have to worry
about setting the new node's next field
because it's initialised to null.
Okay, so now let's look at removing items.
So we have a remove from front method at the moment,
and now we have to do a bit more work
because we have to worry about the tail,
and we have to worry about the previous field
in whatever node comes after the head.
Now it's possible we're going to be removing the only node
in the list, so we have to handle that special case.
So basically what do we wanna do?
Let's suppose that we just have John and Jane in the list,
and John is at the front.
So when we take John away, Jane's next field
will not change, so we don't have to worry about that,
but her previous field has to change,
and she wants to point to whatever came before John,
and so she'll wanna point to John's previous field
because we're gonna take John out,
so whatever was previously before John
will now be before Jane.
Now, if we're removing from the front, that'll be null,
so we could explicitly set her field to null, or we
could just set her to whatever John's previous field has.
And then we want to move the head,
and so we'll set the head to Jane, and that's it.
If we want, we can clean up the references.
In John's nodes, we could set his next reference to null
just like we're already doing,
but essentially what we really have to handle here
on top of what we're already doing is Jane's previous field.
Now, if John is the only node in the list,
then we're gonna have to worry about updating the tail
because the tail will now become null.
If John isn't the only node in the list,
we don't have to change the tail.
The tail's gonna stay the same 'cause we're taking
the front node off the list,
and so if he isn't the only node in the list,
the tail isn't gonna change.
It's still gonna be pointing to the last node in the list.
Okay, so after we've saved off the node we're removing
into remove node, we're gonna test
to see if we're removing the only node in the list,
and we'll do that by saying if head.getNext equals null
because if the head node, if the next field in the head node
is null, it means we've only got one node in the list
so we're removing the only node, and so in that case,
we have to worry setting the tail to null.
If we're not removing the only node in the list,
then we're going to handle Jane's previous field,
and so we're gonna say head.getNext
because if Jane's the second node in the list,
John's next field is pointing to her,
so that's head.getNext, so this will return Jane,
and we wanna set her previous field to null.
We could set this to head.getPrevious
but because we know we're removing from the front,
we'll just ahead and set it to null,
and then we do what we did before.
We set the head to head.getNext 'cause that's Jane,
and we decrement the size,
and here we're just cleaning up a reference.
We don't have to do that but we're cleaning it up,
and then we return the node.
So let's go back to our main method,
and let's remove from the front of the list,
so we'll say list.removeFromFront.
We don't have to pass anything
'cause we're taking off the first person in the list.
And we'll print out our list, and the size again.
So let's run.
So we're back to four employees,
and now Mary is the first employee on the list.
Mike is gone.
And so if we go to the end, Bill's still at the end.
We didn't touch him,
and we have one fewer employees than we did before.
Okay, so we have methods for adding to the front
of the list, adding to the end of the list,
removing from the front, so I guess we need
a remove from end method, so let's write that now.
Public EmployeeNode, removeFromEnd.
We don't need to pass anything
'cause we're always removing the last node.
What do we wanna do when we remove from the end?
Well, right now we have Jane at the end, let's say,
and then Bill, and we wanna remove Bill,
so we're gonna have to change the tail
because the tail is now going to become Jane,
so in this case, we do have to worry
about changing the tail,
and we're gonna want to set Jane's next field to null
because now she'll be the end of list.
And if we wanted to,
we can clean up Bill's previous field.
Now if Bill is the only one in the list,
we also have to worry about setting head to null
because if Bill is the only node in the list,
so we remove him and there's an empty list,
then we have to set head back to null,
so we're gonna have to check for that case,
but the very first thing we're gonna do
is check for an empty list.
I'll just copy this code.
So if you have an empty list,
we obviously don't have to do anything,
nothing to remove.
If we don't have an empty list,
we'll say EmployeeNode, removedNode equals tail.
So up here, the removed node was the head,
but in remove from end, the remove node
will obviously be the tail.
And then we'll do the same thing we did up here,
but this time I'll use if tail.getNext equals null because
that would mean that this is the only node in the list.
Now when we only have one node in the list,
the head and the tail are both pointing to the same node.
I used head here because we're removing from the front.
I'll use tail here 'cause we're removing from the back,
but essentially we're doing the same thing.
So if tail.getNext equals null,
then we only have one node in the list, and so in that case,
we have to worry about setting the head to null.
So you can kinda see we're doing the mirror image here.
Here we had to worry about setting the tail to null
'cause we set the head, we take care of the head here,
and here we have to worry about setting the head to null.
So if we have more than one node in the list,
then what we wanna do here is the node that's becoming
the new tail, we want to set their next field to null,
and we can do that the same way we did up here.
So we get tail.previousNode 'cause that's going
to become the new tail,
and then we'll set its next field to null.
So we'll say tail.getPrevious.setNext to null.
And so if we have the situation where we're removing Bill,
and Jane is gonna become the new tail,
well Bill is currently the tail
'cause we haven't changed that yet.
His previous field is pointing to Jane,
and so her next field will now become null
because she'll be the last node in the list.
And then finally, we're gonna set the tail to
tail.getPrevious
because the new tail is now going to be Jane,
and so right now, tail is pointing to Bill.
His previous is pointing to Jane,
and so the new tail becomes Bill, basically, .getPrevious.
And now we'll do what did here,
so I'll copy these lines of code.
We wanna decrement the size.
This time, we want to remove node's previous
field to be set to null to clean that up,
and then we return the remove node.
So these two methods
are kind of mirror images of each other.
In one case, we're more concerned with what's going
on at the head obviously, and in the other case,
we're more concerned with what's going on at the tail.
In this case, we have to worry about the tail
only when we're removing the only node in the list,
and in this case, we have to worry about the head
if we're removing the only node in the list.
Otherwise, we're just worrying about the tail.
when we're removing from end, and we're just worrying
about the head when we're removing from front.
And if you look at these two methods,
it's kind of the same thing.
They're a little bit different
but we could have written them similarly.
In this case, in the add to front,
we're always setting the next field of the node
to whatever's at the head,
and in the add to end, we're only doing that
if we're dealing with a list that's not empty,
so if we're adding the node into a list that isn't empty,
because when you think about it,
if the list is empty, this statement here
is just gonna set the next field to null,
and we don't really need to do that because the node's
next field is initialised so we could do this.
We could take this statement here
and do the same thing that we're doing here,
and only worry about setting the next field
if we're dealing with a list that isn't empty
so that there's already nodes in it, and so yeah,
when we add the new node into the list,
we'll worry about setting the next field.
Otherwise the next field is already set.
So now they're mirror images of each other.
And let's run to see if everything's working.
Before we do that, let's go back to main,
and let's remove an item from the end of the list.
So I'm gonna copy these three lines.
I'm gonna say remove from end,
and let's run.
All right, so we started off with adding four employees,
and we have Mike Wilson, Mary Smith, John Doe,
and Jane Jones, and we have four employees in the list,
then we added up here.
We added Bill to the end, so now we have five employees,
and we have Bill right at the end,
and then we removed the first employee from the front
so we're back down to four employees, and Mike is gone,
and now finally, we removed an employee from the end,
so we're down to three employees,
and obviously something went wrong here.
So let's go back to our code.
Let me shut this down.
Can you spot the error?
Right here, we said if tail.getNext equals null.
Well, the next field of the tail is always going to be null,
and so what happened is we set the head to null,
and that's why if I go back to thing here,
our head basically blew away our list here.
So this should be if tail.getPrevious equals null,
then we know we only have one node in the list.
Let's run that again.
All right, this time we didn't blow our list away.
So we went through the first results,
and then finally back here,
we wanted to remove Bill from the end,
so we have Mary Smith, John Doe, and Jane Jones,
and we removed Bill from the end,
and we have three employees.
And so our code is working once we fixed that bug.
If you only have one node in the list,
then tail and head are pointing at the same thing,
but obviously if you don't have just one node in the list,
then we wanna be testing the previous field for the tail
'cause we wanna know if there's anything before the tail
because there's never going to be anything after the tail,
so that's why we blew our list away here.
Here we wanna use get next because, in that case,
there's never anything before the head,
so we've gotta check what comes after.
Okay, so that's it for a simple implementation
of a doubly linked list.
I just wanted to give you some idea
of what's going on under the covers.
Now, as I mentioned a few videos ago,
the JDK has a link-list class,
so if you wanna use a link list,
you're probably going to use the class in the JDK,
and so in the next video,
we'll take a quick look at that class.
I'll see you there.